Add page about ATL Mantis EDU (#1560)
PX4/PX4-user_guide: en/complete_vehicles/atl_mantis_edu.md

# ATL Mantis EDU

:::warning
The ATL Mantis EDU is currently work in progress. Use with caution.
:::

The ATL Mantis EDU is based on the ready-to-fly Yuneec Mantis G and geared towards education.

## Purchase

The ATL Mantis EDU version will be released soon.
TODO: add purchase link

## Hardware overview

The Mantis broadly features the following hardware components:

> - Autopilot/FMU based on STM32F7.

Reviewer: So not a separately "for sale" FC that we can link to?

Author: Nope.

- Gimbal controller.
- Camera system on a chip with WiFi (forwards MAVLink messages from autopilot and gimbal via Wifi)
- Downward-facing flow module with laser range sensor.

> ## Update components

Reviewer: I would modify to "Update Mantis Firmware"

> The files to update the Mantis can currently be found on [GoogleDrive](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1tDo9AktWtB47LRzaRaMxDkONTNQHsjCG).

Reviewer: Can we get this on github somewhere. That would allow a direct link and remove browser dependencies (I had one because I have addblocker). 

My first reaction when I was this was "why do I need to update Mantis". Probably that question should be answered in the intro where you have "The ATL Mantis EDU is based on the ready-to-fly Yuneec Mantis G and geared towards education."

Reviewer: Note, this ONLY has firmware.bin for me, which looks like the camera file. It might be good to list all of the files here that someone would expect to see, along with their purpose.

> ### Update camera

Reviewer: FYI, the rest of the user guide uses first-letter heading capitalization, rather than sentence capitalisation. It doesn't matter particularly as long as you are consistent in a document.

1. Place camera image `firmware.bin` on the SD card.
2. Power up the drone. It will reboot and update automatically.
3. Wait until the WiFi re-appears and re-connect.

Note: if the file has been removed from the SD card, the camera has successfully been updated.

### Update gimbal

1. Place the gimbal image `gimbal.yuneec` on the SD card.
2. Power up the drone. The gimbal will be automatically updated.

> 3. After the update, you might hear a faint beep of the gimbal starting up again.

Reviewer: either "the faint beep" or "as the gimbal starts up again"

# ATL Mantis EDU

:::warning

> The ATL Mantis EDU is currently work in progress.

Reviewer: Add link to the product

MAVLink traffic is sent via Wifi on 3 different ports:

1. UDP port 14550: to QGC default auto-connect.
2. UDP port 14540: to SDK (MAVSDK, MAVROS) default connection.
3. UDP port 14530: to RC controller.

### HTTP connection

#### Download Photos/Videos from Internal Storage or SD Card

There is an HTTP server running on 192.168.42.1 that you can use to view or download the media files.

#### Upload Files to SD Card

You can upload files to the SD card when connected to the WiFi of the drone.

The command to upload a file is:
```sh
curl -F "image=@$HOME/path/to/file.ext" -H "Expect:" http://192.168.42.1/cgi-bin/upload
```

For bigger (multi-part) upload, use:
```sh
curl -F "image=@$HOME/path/to/big-file.ext" -H "Expect:" -H "File-Size: $(stat -c%s $HOME/path/to/big-file.ext)" http://192.168.42.1/cgi-bin/upload
```

### RTSP Connection

Video is streamed at 1280x720 at 30 Hz over RTSP.
QGC should connect automatically, as Mantis broadcasts the stream parameters using the [VIDEO_STREAM_INFORMATION](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#VIDEO_STREAM_INFORMATION) MAVLink message.

If you want to connect manually, you can do so on `rtsp://192.168.42.1:554/live`.

> ## Troubleshooting/FAQ

Reviewer: This is 90% troubleshooting, and only a little FAQ. So I changed the ame

### MAVLink and the camera don't connect even though WiFi is connected

Try resetting the camera by pressing a paperclip into the small hole above the SD card slot for 5 seconds.
The camera should reboot and reset some of its internal settings.

### Why does it take over a minute for the WiFi / connection to appear?

The Mantis uses DFS channels on 5 GHz.
In order to be allowed to use these channels, the wifi module needs to listen on these frequency bands for some time to make sure they are not occupied by radars, and other official users.
Once it is verified that the bands are unoccopied, the WiFi will start.

TODO: check if this is required in the US

### The WiFi does not come up

> If the WiFi does not come up after a minute or so, the most common cause is that USB is connected (you can either connect WiFi or USB, but not both at the same time).

Reviewer: Note, I moved this below the other one - chances are the WiFi is just slow to come up as per preceding point.

Author: Thx.

2. Plug the USB stick into the USB-A (not USB-C) port of the RC controller.
3. Power on the RC controller by long pressing the power button.
4. Wait for the blue LED to be on or blinking. This means the controller has finished booting.
5. Hold the Home/RTL button (on the left) pressed while pressing the photo button (top right) quickly 4 times (within 2 seconds).
6. Release the buttons when you hear a beep. It will beep while applying the update.
7. Once the beeping stops with a positive tone (after about 90 seconds), the controller reboots automatically.

:::note
The **update.lzo** file is not remove on the USB stick after the update.
:::

## Developing PX4 Firmware

### Build the PX4 Firmware

To build PX4 for the Mantis, use the make command:
```
make atl_mantis-edu
```

### Upload/flash the PX4 Firmware

There are two ways to update the firmware:

#### Upload while connected to the Mantis' WiFi:

The firmware will be uploaded to the SD-card over http using curl:
```
make atl_mantis-edu upload_wifi
```

:::note
Make sure to have an SD card inserted for this.
:::

#### Upload using the SD card

> 

Reviewer 2: Add?

:::warning
The update method using the SD card relies on the camera being able to reboot the FMU via mavlink command. Should you flash a px4 firmware, where mavlink is not properly configured or booting, you might be unable to flash another firmware update using the SD card method.

TODO: What to do in case this happens?
:::

Author: Good Idea!

Reviewer: Is this resolved?

Reviewer 2: Yes, Julian's update actually prevents exactly this case from happening :)

The built firmware can be found in `build/atl_mantis-edu_default/atl_mantis-edu_default.px4`.

To update the vehicle with this firmware: rename the file to **autopilot.px4**, copy it to root of the SD card, and restart the vehicle (as described above).

## Using MAVSDK with the Mantis

By default MAVSDK connects via MAVLink on UDP port 14540.
This port is configured for the Mantis, so MAVSDK examples and tests should mostly work out of the box.

TODO: Add more detailed tutorial how to use MAVSDK with the Mantis.

## Connection

> You can either connect to the drone using WiFi, or using a USB cable connected to the remote control.

Reviewer: We have got to here before it is clear that we can connect to QGC. I think it is probably worth stating here or in the intro that this is possible. I also think it is worth being clear what you can do with QGC after update - can I use it for firmware update (after the first time)? Can I set parameters, stream video?  Can I update the camera?

Here you might start with something like.

> You can connect to the drone for firmware update or for connecting to QGC or MAVSDK (or other mavlink client) ...

Author: > can I use it for firmware update (after the first time)?

No you cannot.

The ATL Mantis EDU version will be released soon.
TODO: add purchase link

## Hardware Overview

The Mantis broadly features the following hardware components:
- Autopilot/FMU based on STM32F7.
- Gimbal controller.
- Camera system on a chip with WiFi (forwards MAVLink messages from autopilot and gimbal via Wifi)
- Downward-facing flow module with laser range sensor.

## Update Mantis EDU

The files to update the Mantis can currently be found on [GoogleDrive](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1LXW66IBGc_SgGLmk0ltl3R8IQYYVUvtz).

Files include:
1. **camera.bin**: Camera firmware
2. **gimbal.yuneec**: Gimbal firmware
3. **autopilot-bootloader.px4**: Autopilot firmware to update bootloader (only to be used during first update).
4. **autopilot.px4**: Autopilot firmware
5. **update.lzo**: RC firmware

### Initial complete update

When starting off with a "stock" Yuneec Mantis G, you need to do an initial complete update of all components in the order below!
These steps are required in order to unlock the drone and allow flashing custom PX4 builds. Furthermore the new bootloader is
more robust and prevents the drone from being bricked should a bad custom PX4 build be flashed.

> :::note

Reviewer: perhaps a :::warning ?

Reviewer 2: Done :+1:

During the initial update you need to update the PX4 bootloader! Use **autopilot-bootloader.px4** before **autopilot.px4**.
:::

:::note
Before being able to flash px4 updates to the Mantis, its camera firmware needs to be updated first.
The camera will not update if a autopilot.px4 file is already on the SD card!
:::

#### Update Camera

1. Place camera image **camera.bin** on the SD card.
2. Power up the drone.
   It will reboot and update automatically.
3. Wait until the WiFi re-appears and re-connect.

> Note: if the file has been removed from the SD card, the camera has successfully been updated.

Reviewer: You probably don't need "Note:"

Reviewer 2: Fair point :+1:

Therefore, if the motors are spinning, it's not possible to generate beeps.

### How can I switch between the internal storage and the SD card?

The primary storage can be selected in QGC.
Connect to drone via WiFi, start QGC, and go to the camera settings (gear icon next to camera buttons on the right of the screen).
There, you should find the option to select the storage.

### Can I upload the PX4 firmware by connecting over USB?

No, this is not possible, unless you have a special cable.

You can however, copy the `build/atl_mantis-edu_default/atl_mantis-edu_default.px4` file on SD card and rename it to `autopilot.px4`.
If you then power up the Mantis, it will flash the file automatically.

## What is open-source?

- The PX4 firmware is open-source.
- The camera is proprietary but implementing the [MAVLink camera protocol](https://mavlink.io/en/services/camera.html) and [MAVLink camera definition](https://mavlink.io/en/services/camera_def.html).
- The gimbal is proprietary but implementing the [MAVLink gimbal v2 protocol](https://mavlink.io/en/services/gimbal_v2.html).
- The flow module is proprietary communicating via MAVLink.

## How to get help/technical support?

> For hardware issues, please contact TODO: add vendor.

Reviewer 2: TODO: We need to provide information on the Vendor and also where to buy the Mantis Edu

Author: We'll do it later.

The files to update the Mantis can currently be found on [GoogleDrive](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1LXW66IBGc_SgGLmk0ltl3R8IQYYVUvtz).

Files include:
- **autopilot-bootloader.px4**: Autopilot firmware to update bootloader (only to be used during first update).

> - **autopilot.px4**: Autopilot firmware

Author: Why did you re-order this? I had it in the same order as the headings below which is also the order how they need to be flashed! Otherwise it will fail.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I did not consider that. I ordered them alphabetically as they will appear in a file browser.

Reviewer 2: Should we make it an enumerated list then to make it clear, that there is an actual order?

Author: Yes, that sounds good.

Reviewer 2: Done

- **camera.bin**: Camera firmware
- **gimbal.yuneec**: Gimbal firmware
- **update.lzo**: RC firmware

### Initial complete update

When starting off with a "stock" Yuneec Mantis G, you need to do an initial complete update of all components in the order below!

> These steps are required in order to unlock the drone and allow flashing custom PX4 builds. Furthermore the new bootloader is
> robuster and prevents the drone from being bricked should a bad custom PX4 build be flashed.

Author: ```suggestion
These steps are required in order to unlock the drone and allow flashing custom PX4 builds. Furthermore the new bootloader is
more robust and prevents the drone from being bricked should a bad custom PX4 build be flashed.
```

Reviewer 2: It was "early" in the morning, okay? :sweat_smile:
